# General Problem of Describing Syntax

Languages, #synthetic or natural, are a set of strings of characters. The strings are labelled #sentences or statements.

The #syntax rules specify *which* strings from the language's alphabet are in the language. Comparing #synthetic to natural languages, English has a far higher complexity in syntax than even the largest and most complex programming languages.

The smallest units of formal #syntax are called #lexemes. The #lexemes  are typically provided separately from the syntactic description of the programming languages.

#lexemes include, but are not limited to, the languages: numeric literals, operators and special words.

#lexemes are also partition into groups, such as variables, methods, classes and others in programming languages, called #identifiers.

Each group of #lexemes  is represented by a #token.

A #token is a description of a languages category of #lexemes. Some #tokens may only have one #lexeme attached to them, such as an arithmetic or equality operator.



## Language Recognizers

Languages can be defined in two distinct ways: #recognition and #generation.
Considering #recognition, the ability of a recognizer, is to recognize all *valid* input strings, and see if they exist in a given language, and to be able to accept, or reject a given input string. This effectively acts like a filter against anything not described in the given Language.

#recognition devices are not used to enumerate all sentences of a language.

#syntaxanalysis  in a compiler is a recognizer for the language the compiler translates. And in this role, it only needs to determine whether the given parts of strings belong to the language, and determines whether or not the input is syntactically correct.

Another name for syntax analyzers are #parsers.

## Language Generators

A #generator is a device that can generate sentences in a language.

Despite the seemingly limited usefulness of having a device that randomly generates a sentence, it can be more useful for programmers, as #syntaxanalysis only works  through trial and error. Given the nature of the Generator, it is possible to determine if a sentence is correct by comparing it with the structure of the generator.

There is a close connection between #generation and #recognition devices.