## Reasons for Studying Concepts of Programming Languages

The following is considered a compelling list of potential benefits of studying [[Concepts of Programming Languages]]:
### Increased capacity to express ideas.
#cognition #abstraction

It is widely believed that it is difficult for people to conceptualize structures they cannot describe, verbally or in writing of natural language.

Programmers, can be considered to have a similar constraint. Thus programmers can increase their range of software development, and conceptualization through learning new [[language constructs]].

Some may argue that learning the capabilities of other languages do not help a programmer who is forced to use a language that lacks such capabilities. However that argument is not well supported, because [[language constructs]] can often be simulated in other languages that do not support those constructs directly. **For example, a C programmer who had learned the structure and uses of [[associative arrays]] in [[Perl]] might design structures that simulate [[associative arrays]] in that language.** 

To summarize, the study of programming languages builds an appreciation for valuable language features and constructs, and encourages programmers to use them even when a language does not directly support such constructs.
### Improved Background for Choosing Appropriate Languages

Professional programmers that have developed their skills independently or through in-house training, often are limited to knowledge in only the relevant languages to their projects. Similarly for professionals that received formal training but during a previous time of language availability. As a result, many programmers when given the chance, will use languages their are already familiar with, even when the language is not well suited for the project. 

If these programmers were familiar with a wider range of languages, they would be equipped to better choose a language with features that best address the problem.

While some features of one language can be simulated in another, it is preferable to use a feature whose design is integrated into the language, reducing bloat, and improving safety.
### Increased Ability to Learn New Languages

The process of learning new programming languages can be lengthy and difficult, especially for someone who is comfortable with only one or two languages and has never examined programming language concepts in general. Once a thorough understanding of the [[fundamental concepts of languages]] are acquired, it becomes far easier to see how these concepts are incorporated into the design of the language being learned. 

The same phenomenon occurs in natural languages. The better you know the grammar of your native language, the easier it is to learn a second language. 

The [TIOBE Programming Community Index](https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/) is an indicator of the relative popularity of programming languages. 

Finally, it is essential that practicing programmers know the vocabulary and fundamental concepts of programming languages so they can read and understand [[programming language descriptions]] and [[programming language evaluations]]. 
### Better Understanding of the Significance of Implementation
#implementation #compilers #interpreters

In learning the concepts of programming languages, it is both interesting and necessary to touch on the [[language implementation]] issues that affect those concepts. In some cases, having an understanding of implementation issues (e.g., how a [[compiler]] or [[interpreter]]) leads to a greater understanding of why languages are designed the way they are. This knowledge leads to the ability to use a language more intelligently, as it was designed to be used. We can become better programmers by understanding the choices behind [[programming language constructs]] and the consequences of those choices.

Certain bugs (especially [[runtime-errors]]) can be found and fixed only by a programmer who understands the related implementation details. In some cases, the same knowledge can be used to compare relative [[algorithmic-efficiency]] of constructs that may be chosen for a program. 
### Better Use of Languages that are Already Known


### Overall Advancement of Computing